# Mental Health F30 F99 by Age Race Gender 2018

## Documentation 

### Citation

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Underlying Cause of Death 1999-2018 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released in 2020. Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1999-2018, as compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program.

### Help File

https://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/help/ucd.html

### About

The Underlying Cause of Death database contains mortality and population counts for all U.S. counties. Data are based on death certificates for U.S. residents. Each death certificate identifies a single underlying cause of death and demographic data. The number of deaths, crude death rates or age-adjusted death rates, and 95% confidence intervals and standard errors for death rates can be obtained by place of residence (total U.S., region, state and county), age group (single-year-of age, 5-year age groups, 10-year age groups and infant age groups), race, Hispanic ethnicity, gender, year, cause-of-death (4-digit ICD-10 code or group of codes), injury intent and injury mechanism, drug/alcohol induced causes and urbanization categories. Data are also available for place of death, month and week day of death, and whether an autopsy was performed. Data Use Restrictions: The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 242m(d)) provides that the data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) may be used only for the purpose for which they were obtained; any effort to determine the identity of any reported cases, or to use the information for any purpose other than for health statistical reporting and analysis, is against the law. Therefore users will: Use these data for health statistical reporting and analysis only. For sub-national geography, do not present or publish death counts of 9 or fewer or death rates based on counts of nine or fewer (in figures, graphs, maps, tables, etc.). Make no attempt to learn the identity of any person or establishment included in these data. Make no disclosure or other use of the identity of any person or establishment discovered inadvertently and advise the NCHS Confidentiality Officer of any such discovery. Confidentiality Officer National Center for Health Statistics 3311 Toledo Road Hyattsville, MD 20782 Telephone 888-642-4159 Email: nchsconfidentiality@cdc.gov Sanctions for Violating Rules: Researchers who violate the terms of the data use restrictions will lose access to WONDER and their sponsors and institutions will be notified. Researchers who are suspected of violating the rules may be prevented from using WONDER until an investigation can be completed. Deliberately making a false statement in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the Federal government violates 18 USC 1001 and is punishable by a fine of up to $10,000 or up to 5 years in prison, or both.

### Data URL

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/VitalStatsOnline.htm#Mortality_Multiple

### Dataset Caveats

* Note: County of residence is misidentified in 316 deaths that occurred in the year 2000, for Hartford County, CT (FIPS code 09003) and New London County, CT (FIPS code 09011). #errata#
* Totals and Percent of Total are disabled when data are grouped by a 113 or 130 Cause List because both aggregate and detailed values are displayed in the table. Also be aware that charts and maps containing both aggregate and detail data could be misleading.
* When you group results by 15 Leading Causes, results show the top 15 rankable causes for the query criteria. Rankable causes are a subset of the ICD 113 and ICD 130 (Infants) Cause Lists. #Top15#
* Population and rates are labeled 'Not Applicable' when they include a subset of ages 85-100+ because populations are not available for those ages. #Ages 85-100#
* Population and rates are labeled 'Not Applicable' when Autopsy, Place of Death, Weekday or Month are grouped by or limited, due to lack of a valid population. #NotApplicableRates#
* Autopsy data are available starting in the year 2003, Autopsy data for years 1999-2002 are categorized as 'Unknown.'
* As of April 3, 2017, the underlying cause of death has been revised for 125 deaths in 2014. #2014-Revision#
* Circumstances in Georgia for the years 2008 and 2009 have resulted in unusually high death counts for the Place of Death category "Place of death unknown." Caution should be used in interpreting these data. #Georgia-Reporting-Anomalies#
* Circumstances in Georgia for the years 2008 and 2009 have resulted in unusually high death counts for the ICD-10 cause of death code R99, "Other ill-defined and unspecified causes of mortality." Caution should be used in interpreting these data. #Georgia-Reporting-Anomalies#
* Circumstances in New Jersey for the year 2009 have resulted in unusually high death counts for the ICD-10 cause of death code R99, "Other ill-defined and unspecified causes of mortality" and therefore unusually low death counts in other ICD-10 codes, most notably R95, "Sudden Infant Death Syndrome" and X40-X49, "Unintentional poisoning." Caution should be used in interpreting these data. #New-Jersey-Reporting-Anomalies#
* Circumstances in California resulted in unusually high death counts for the ICD-10 cause of death code R99, "Other ill-defined and unspecified causes of mortality" for deaths occurring in years 2000 and 2001. Caution should be used in interpreting these data. #California-Reporting-Anomalies#
* concat("These items in the results table are not fully selected: ", wonder:partial-hier-labels(), ". The Query Description lists the actual values selected.")
* Data for Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area, AK (FIPS code 02198), Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, AK (FIPS code 02105), Skagway Municipality, AK (FIPS code 02230), Petersburg Borough/Census Area, AK (FIPS code 02195) and Wrangell City and Borough, AK (FIPS code 02275) are only available for 2014 and later; for computational purposes, counts and population estimates for 2013 and earlier are set to zero. Thus, counts and rates shown in multi-year requests for this entity do not include any data for years before 2014, only data for 2014 and later. #Alaska2014#
* Data for Prince of Wales-Outer Ketchikan Census Area, AK (FIPS code 02201), Skagway-Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, AK (FIPS code 02232) and Wrangell-Petersburg Census Area, AK (FIPS code 02280) are only available for 2013 and earlier; for computational purposes, counts and population estimates for 2014 and later are set to zero. Thus, counts and rates shown in multi-year requests for this entity do not include any data for years after 2013, only data for 2013 and earlier. #Alaska2014#
* Data for Bedford city, Va. (FIPS code 51515) are only available for 2013 and earlier; for computational purposes, counts and population estimates for 2014 and later are set to zero. Thus, counts and rates shown in multi-year requests for this entity do not include any data for years after 2014, only data for 2013 and earlier. #Bedford#
* There is a discontinuity in the mortality and population data for Bedford County (FIPS code 51019) between years 2013 and 2014. The discontinuity occurs because Bedford City, Virginia (FIPS code 51515), formerly an independent city, merged with Bedford County (FIPS code 51019) on July 1, 2013. Beginning in 2014, deaths and population counts for Bedford City, Virginia (FIPS code 51515) are included in Bedford County (FIPS code 51019).
* Data for Denali Borough, Alaska (FIPS code 02068) are only available for 2003 and later; for computational purposes, counts and population estimates for 1999-2002 are set to zero. Thus, counts and rates shown in multi-year requests for this entity do not include any data for years prior to 2003, only data for 2003 and later. #Denali Borough#
* There is a discontinuity in the mortality and population data for Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area (FIPS code 02290) between 2002 and 2003. The discontinuity occurs because part of Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area became Denali Borough, Alaska (FIPS code 02068) and beginning in 2003, deaths and population counts for this former part of Yukon-Koyukuk are reported for Denali Borough and are no longer included with data for Yukon-Koyukuk.
* Death rates for Clifton Forge city, Virginia (FIPS code 51560) are available only for 1999-2000. For 2001 and beyond, death counts and population estimates for Clifton Forge city have been combined with those for Alleghany county, Virginia (FIPS code 51005). Death counts and population estimates for this entity from multi-year requests, only reflect data from 1999 and 2000; for 2001 and beyond they have been set to zero. #Clifton Forge#
* There is a discontinuity in the mortality and population data for Alleghany, Virginia (FIPS code 51005) between 2000 and 2001. It occurs because for 2001 and beyond, death counts and population estimates for Clifton Forge city, Virginia (FIPS code 51560) have been combined with those for Alleghany county.
* Data for Broomfield, Colorado (FIPS code 08014) are only available for 2003 and later; for computational purposes, counts and population estimates for 1999-2002 are set to zero. Thus, counts and rates shown in multi-year requests for this entity do not include any data for years prior to 2003, only data for 2003 and later. #Broomfield#
* There is a discontinuity in the mortality and population data for Adams, Colorado (FIPS code 08001), Boulder, Colorado (FIPS code 08013), Jefferson, Colorado (FIPS code 08059), and Weld, Colorado (FIPS code 080123) between 2002 and 2003. This discontinuity occurs because territory in each of these four counties has been combined to form a new county, Broomfield, Colorado (FIPS code 08014). Beginning in 2003, deaths and population counts for this territory are reported for Broomfield county and are no longer included with data for Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld.
* Deaths for Allen Parish, Louisiana (FIPS code 22003] in years 2006 through 2008 are under reported due to problems with registering the deaths with the Louisiana Vital Statistics Office.
* Deaths and population estimates are shown separately from the adjacent counties for Carson City, Nevada (FIPS code 32510).
* Deaths and population estimates are reported separately for Baltimore City (FIPS code 24510) and Baltimore county (FIPS code 24005).
* Deaths and population estimates are reported separately for St. Louis City (FIPS code 29510) and county (FIPS code 29189).
* Data are Suppressed when the data meet the criteria for confidentiality constraints. #Assurance of Confidentiality#
* Death rates are flagged as Unreliable when the rate is calculated with a numerator of 20 or less. #Unreliable#
* concat("The populations used to calculate standard age-adjusted rates are documented here: ", wonder:cmf-aar-pop())
* The criteria used to determine the populations for the non-standard age-adjusted rates are documented in the <a href="#Non-standard Age Adjusted Rate Parameters:">Query Criteria</a> section below.
* concat("The method used to calculate age-adjusted rates is documented here: ", wonder:cmf-aar-help())
* Deaths for persons of unknown age are included in counts and crude rates, but are not included in age-adjusted rates.
* To accommodate geographic shifts of the Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas populations resulting from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, the U.S. Census Bureau developed adjustments in the methodology for state and county population estimates. #Hurricanes Methodology#
* Deaths of persons with Age "Not Stated" are included in "All" counts and rates, but are not distributed among age groups, so are not included in age-specific counts, age-specific rates or in any age-adjusted rates. #Not Stated#
* Deaths of persons with Age "Not Stated" are included in "All" counts and rates, but are not distributed among age groups, so are not included in age-specific counts, age-specific rates or in any age-adjusted rates. #Not Stated#
* Deaths of persons with Age "Not Stated" are included in "All" counts and rates, but are not distributed among age groups, so are not included in age-specific counts, age-specific rates or in any age-adjusted rates. #Not Stated#
* Deaths of persons with Hispanic origin "Not Stated" are included in "All" counts and rates, but are not distributed among Hispanic Origin groups, so are not included in the Hispanic Origin specific counts and rates. #Not Stated#
* Information included on the death certificate about the race and Hispanic ethnicity of the decedent is reported by the funeral director as provided by an informant, often the surviving next of kin, or, in the absence of an informant, on the basis of observation. Race and ethnicity information from the census is by self-report. To the extent that race and Hispanic origin are inconsistent between these two data sources, death rates will be biased. #Racial Differences#
* The method used to calculate 95% confidence intervals is documented here: #Confidence-Intervals#
* The method used to calculate standard errors is documented here: #Standard-Errors#
* The population figures for year 2018 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2018 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 25, 2019. The population figures for year 2017 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2017 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 27, 2018. The population figures for year 2016 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2016 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 26, 2017. The population figures for year 2015 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2015 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 28, 2016. The population figures for year 2014 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2014 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 30, 2015. The population figures for year 2013 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2013 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 26, 2014. The population figures for year 2012 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2012 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 13, 2013. The population figures for year 2011 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2011 postcensal series released by NCHS on July 18, 2012. Population figures for 2010 are April 1 Census counts. The population figures for years 2001 - 2009 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the revised intercensal county-level 2000 - 2009 series released by NCHS on October 26, 2012. Population figures for 2000 are April 1 Census counts. Population figures for 1999 are from the 1990-1999 intercensal series of July 1 estimates. Population figures for the infant age groups are the number of live births. <br/><b>Note:</b> Rates and population figures for years 2001 - 2009 differ slightly from previously published reports, due to use of the population estimates which were available at the time of release.
* The population figures for year 2018 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2018 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 25, 2019. The population figures for year 2017 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2017 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 27, 2018. The population figures for year 2016 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2016 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 26, 2017. The population figures for year 2015 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2015 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 28, 2016. The population figures for year 2014 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2014 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 30, 2015. The population figures for year 2013 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2013 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 26, 2014. The population figures for year 2012 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2012 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 13, 2013. The population figures for year 2011 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2011 postcensal series released by NCHS on July 18, 2012. Population figures for 2010 are April 1 Census counts. The population figures for 2001 - 2009, other than the infant age groups, are archive bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, generally from the corresponding county-level postcensal series: 2009 from the Vintage 2009 series, 2008 from the Vintage 2008 series, 2007 from the Vintage 2007 series, 2006 from the Vintage 2006 series, 2005 from the Vintage 2005 series, 2004 from the Vintage 2004 series, and 2003 from the Vintage 2003 series. The population figures for 2002 and 2001 are from the Vintage 2002 postcensal series. Population figures for 2000 are April 1 Census counts. Population figures for 1999 are from the 1990-1999 intercensal series of July 1 estimates. Population figures for the infant age groups are the number of live births. <br/><b>Note:</b> Archive rates and populations figures for years 2001- 2009 match NCHS mortality reports published in that time period, but differ slightly from reports published after 2009, because more recent reports are calculated with the revised intercensal July 1 population estimates for those years.
* The population figures used in the calculation of death rates for the age group 'under 1 year' are the estimates of the resident population that is under one year of age. #Age Group#
* The population figures used in this table are the number of live births. Number of live births has been substituted for the estimate of the population under 1 year of age to permit calculation of infant mortality rates. All rates in this table are calculated by dividing the number of infant deaths by the number of registered live births in the same time period. It is recommended that infant mortality rates be calculated per 1,000 births. #Infant Mortality#
* The Place of Death category 'Medical Facility - Status unknown' is only available from 1999 - 2002, and 'Hospice facility' is only available for 2003 and later.
* Beginning with the 2018 data, changes have been implemented that affect the counts for ICD-10 cause of death codes O00-O99 compared to previous practice. In addition, data for the cause of death codes O00-O99 for 2003 through 2017 reflect differences in information available to individual states and probable errors. Caution should be used in interpreting these data. More information can be found at: <a href="https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/maternal-mortality/">https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/maternal-mortality/</a>.
* Changes to cause of death classification affect reporting trends. #ICD-10 Changes#


### Additional Caveats
* Death rates are flagged as Unreliable when the rate is calculated with a numerator of 20 or less. <a href="/wonder/help/ucd.html#Unreliable" target="WONDER_Help" onclick="setfocus('WONDER_Help')">More information.</a>

* Deaths of persons with Age "Not Stated" are included in "All" counts and rates, but are not distributed among age groups, so are not included in age-specific counts, age-specific rates or in any age-adjusted rates. <a href="/wonder/help/ucd.html#Not Stated" target="WONDER_Help" onclick="setfocus('WONDER_Help')">More information.</a>

* Information included on the death certificate about the race and Hispanic ethnicity of the decedent is reported by the funeral director as provided by an informant, often the surviving next of kin, or, in the absence of an informant, on the basis of observation. Race and ethnicity information from the census is by self-report. To the extent that race and Hispanic origin are inconsistent between these two data sources, death rates will be biased. <a href="/wonder/help/ucd.html#Racial Differences" target="WONDER_Help" onclick="setfocus('WONDER_Help')">More information.</a>

* The population figures for year 2018 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2018 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 25, 2019. The population figures for year 2017 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2017 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 27, 2018. The population figures for year 2016 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2016 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 26, 2017. The population figures for year 2015 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2015 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 28, 2016. The population figures for year 2014 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2014 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 30, 2015. The population figures for year 2013 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2013 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 26, 2014. The population figures for year 2012 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2012 postcensal series released by NCHS on June 13, 2013. The population figures for year 2011 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the Vintage 2011 postcensal series released by NCHS on July 18, 2012. Population figures for 2010 are April 1 Census counts. The population figures for years 2001 - 2009 are bridged-race estimates of the July 1 resident population, from the revised intercensal county-level 2000 - 2009 series released by NCHS on October 26, 2012. Population figures for 2000 are April 1 Census counts. Population figures for 1999 are from the 1990-1999 intercensal series of July 1 estimates. Population figures for the infant age groups are the number of live births. <br/><b>Note:</b> Rates and population figures for years 2001 - 2009 differ slightly from previously published reports, due to use of the population estimates which were available at the time of release.

* The population figures used in the calculation of death rates for the age group 'under 1 year' are the estimates of the resident population that is under one year of age. <a href="/wonder/help/ucd.html#Age Group" target="WONDER_Help" onclick="setfocus('WONDER_Help')">More information.</a>

* Beginning with the 2018 data, changes have been implemented that affect the counts for ICD-10 cause of death codes O00-O99 compared to previous practice. In addition, data for the cause of death codes O00-O99 for 2003 through 2017 reflect differences in information available to individual states and probable errors. Caution should be used in interpreting these data. More information can be found at: <a href="https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/maternal-mortality/">https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/maternal-mortality/</a>.

* Changes to cause of death classification affect reporting trends. <a href="/wonder/help/ucd.html#ICD-10 Changes" target="WONDER_Help" onclick="setfocus('WONDER_Help')">More information.</a>

